DOCKER AND KUBERNETES

Today I worked with Kubernetes using kubectl and Minikube on an EC2 instance. First, I checked the Kubernetes version and verified that the cluster was running properly. I created and managed pods using the nginx image, accessed the pod terminal, and learned how to view, describe, and delete pods.
Next, I created a Deployment to manage multiple nginx pods automatically. I scaled the deployment to run multiple replicas and understood how Kubernetes maintains the desired number of pods. I also created a ConfigMap and Secret to store configuration values and sensitive data, and connected them to the deployment as environment variables.
After that, I created a Service of type NodePort to expose the nginx application so it could be accessed through a browser using the Minikube IP and NodePort. Finally, I verified the setup by accessing the pod, printing environment variables, and confirming that the deployment, service, ConfigMap, and Secret were working correctly


Important commands used:
kubectl version – Shows kubectl client and Kubernetes server version.
kubectl get pods – Shows all running pods in the cluster.
kubectl get pods -n kube-system – Lists system pods in kube-system namespace.
kubectl get pods -l app=nginx – Shows pods with label app=nginx.
kubectl describe pod etcd-minikube -n kube-system – Shows detailed info about etcd-minikube pod.
kubectl describe pod <pod-name> – Shows detailed information about a specific pod.
kubectl run althaf-nginx --image=nginx – Creates and runs a pod using nginx image.
kubectl exec -it althaf-nginx -- /bin/bash – Opens terminal inside the pod.
kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- /bin/sh – Opens shell inside running pod.
kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- /bin/sh -c 'echo $WELCOME_MSG' – Displays ConfigMap value inside pod.
kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- /bin/sh -c 'echo $ADMIN_PASSWORD' – Displays Secret value inside pod.
kubectl delete pod althaf-nginx – Deletes the specified pod.
kubectl delete pod <pod-name> – Deletes a specific pod.
kubectl create deployment althaf-nginx --image=nginx – Creates a deployment using nginx image.
kubectl delete deployment althaf-nginx – Deletes the deployment and its pods.
kubectl scale deployment althaf-nginx --replicas=5 – Scales deployment to run 5 pods.
kubectl apply -f nginx-configmap.yaml – Creates ConfigMap to store configuration values.
kubectl apply -f nginx-secret.yaml – Creates Secret to store sensitive data like passwords.
kubectl apply -f nginx-deployment.yaml – Creates Deployment and runs nginx pods using YAML file.
kubectl apply -f nginx-service.yaml – Creates Service to expose nginx pods.
kubectl get svc – Lists all services in the cluster.
kubectl get svc nginx-service – Shows details of nginx-service including port and IP.
kubectl rollout restart deployment nginx-deployment – Restarts deployment and recreates pods.
kubectl cluster-info – Displays Kubernetes cluster information.
minikube start – Starts local Kubernetes cluster.
minikube ip – Shows Minikube cluster IP address.
minikube service nginx-service --url – Shows URL to access nginx service in browser.

CONCLUSION
This task helped me understand how Kubernetes manages applications using Pods, Deployments, Services, ConfigMaps, and Secrets
